the Israeli Army has been expanding its
attacks in Central and Southern Gaza
nearly two months into this conflict the
US has used some of its strongest
language to date warning Israel to
protect civilians but just how long can
this war go on for and what would a
victory look like this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello there and welcome to the program
I'm Laura Kyle Israel's military has
resumed its fullscale attack on the Gaza
Strip launching air strikes on hospitals
and crowded residential areas nearly
16,000 Palestinians have now been killed
since early October that figure is
Rising by the hour The Limited number of
Aid trucks going into the strip and
nowhere near enough to meet the needs of
millions of desperate people and after
nearly two months of War Israel's
biggest Ally appears to be changing its
tone and warning against civilian deaths
in Gaza US Secretary of Defense Lloyd
Austin says Israel risks a strategic
defeat if it doesn't do more to protect
civilians it's a sentiment being shared
by other senior us officials so what's
behind this sudden warning from
Washington we'll put that to our guests
in just a moment first this report from
f
a clear warning to Israel from its most
important Ally us defense secretary
Lloyd Austin made his concerns clear if
Israel doesn't do more to prevent
civilian deaths in Gaza its war is
doomed to fail in the long run you see
in this kind of a fight the center of
gravity is the civilian
population and if you drive them into
the arms of the enemy you replace a
tactical Victory with a strategic
defeat so I have repeatedly made clear
to Israel's lead leaders that protecting
Palestinian civilians in Gaza is both a
moral
responsibility and a strategic
imperative just days earlier the US
Secretary of State also urged Israel to
adjust its strategy more than 15,000
Palestinians have been killed by Israeli
forces in Gaza and shortages of
essential supplies are making life there
nearly
impossible I made clear that after the
pause it was imperative that Israel put
in place clear protections for civilians
uh and for sustaining humanitarian
assistance uh going forward while
Israel's prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu has admitted his forces have
failed to minimize civilian deaths he
places the blame on
Hamas Israel accuses the armed group of
placing its military assets in civilian
buildings without providing much
evidence Hamas wants to kill as many
Israelis as possible and has no regard
whatsoever to Palestinian lives every
day they perpetrate a double War crime
targeting our civilians while hiding
behind their civilians embedding
themselves in the civilian
population and using them as human
Shields Israel's bombing campaign has
reduced entire neighborhoods to rebel
and displaced hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians many in the International
Community including the UN Secretary
General have called on Israel to rethink
its strategy and do more to protect
civilians now with the US its closest
Ally joining the chorus it's not clear
yet if Israel will change its tactics
vincon Mahan for Inside
[Music]
Story well let's bring in our guests now
and in rala Bushra khi policy lead in
the occupied Palestinian territory and
Israel at Oxfam in Brussels Elijah mager
military and political analyst and in
Cairo Hussein haridi a former assistant
foreign minister of Egypt a very warm
welcome to all of you Elijah magir these
are some of the strongest or are the
strongest warnings for Israel to protect
civilians that we've heard publicly from
the US why are we hearing them
now I think it's very interesting to
hear that the Americans are taking some
distance of what Israel is committing as
violating International laws and obvious
crimes against humanity and war crimes
it is something very good to hear the
Israel the American officials saying
that the Israelis cannot continue
killing civilians and they have to be
careful how to bomb Gaza so that is
first of all an acknowledgement that
Israel is in indeed killing civilians
and the result is we have 16,000 people
killed of which 70 to 80% are civilians
secondly it is why the Americans are
saying it and if that uh serves some
purposes now it is not serving any
purpose because the Israelis continue
the war if it this is going to put an
end to the military operation it is not
obviously because yesterday was the most
intensive bombardment on Gaza and what
is the final purpose and to my view the
final purpose is more of a presidential
us campaign because there is no strict
position that the Americans is taking to
tell the Israelis that they have to stop
their war on children and women because
this is the only tactical victory that
they have achieved so far Hussein haridi
as a former Ambassador and from your
time in the Egyptian foreign Ministry
you've got uh experience of the
Diplomatic Machinery between the US and
Israel how far do you think Israel is
likely to Heed These Sterner warnings
from the
us at the outset Madame let me express
my uh my my solidarity with the
Palestinian resistance and with the
Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip and my thoughts and the thoughts
of many Egyptians the majority of
Egyptians go out for the more than
16,000 Palestinians who died who have
died under the Israeli bombardment
having said so I guess uh in the not far
distant future the Israeli War cabinet
would have to listen
would have to heed the messages the
latest messages coming out of fton
whether on the part of you the United
States President Joe Biden or the
Secretary of State uh Tony blinkin or
lately uh General Le Austin the uh the
Secretary of Defense I guess the message
is coming out of Washington are loud and
clear We Are One Step we are one step
away from the American Administration
calling for a ceas fire when will now
the the the question is
not whether it would call for a
ceasefire but the question is uh
probably when it will do so my personal
take on the on the
positions uh of the senior American
officials is
that we could in the next few weeks uh
hear the world ceasefire coming out of
washon okay let's let's just get Elijah
back on on that one point there do you
agree that we're one step away from the
US calling for a ceasefire because
that's certainly not on the table at the
moment yes we are very far from
ceasefire because the israelies haven't
achieved any of their objectives this is
why I call a so far the Israelis facing
a tactical defeat because they claim
they have occupied 40% of north of Gaza
of which half of it is an open air
agriculture terrain secondly we've seen
how the Palestinian resistance are
inflicting heavy casualties on the
Israeli occupation forces and third
we've seen every single day the
Palestinian resistant capable of bombing
different cities and Villages including
Tel Aviv and that happened this morning
and also we have seen how the release of
the captives happen in the heart of the
north of Gaza where the Palestinian
resistance is not yet in direct contact
on daily basis with the Israelis because
the Israelis are too afraid to be in
contact in a dense area against the
Palestinian resistance so achieve a
calling for a ceasefire now
we are so far away because that means a
total defeat for bamin
Netanyahu for his right-wing government
who threaten to uh offer a resignation
if he doesn't invade all of Gaza and
kill all Palestinians and then he will
go directly to jail it is in the
advantage of Netanyahu to continue this
war he Express the all differences with
the Americans because the Americans
understand that this way has exposed the
weakness of what used to be called the
strongest army in the Middle East and it
turned out that a bunch of Palestinian
resistant confronting this tremendous
Army that is capable of bombarding has a
tremendous Firepower but is afraid to
confronting the Palestinian resistance
on the ground so okay Elijah I'll get
back to uh the state of the battlefield
in just a moment before we get to uh bog
down in that I want to bring in Bushra
because we need to get a very clear
picture of what we're actually talking
about when the US is warning to protect
civilians how much civilians need these
kind of warnings for Israel to do more
Bushra since the ceasefire broke down on
Friday we've seen some of the most
intense fighting in Gaza and air strikes
on the south can you bring us up to
speed with what the people there are
suffering what they're having to put up
with um I first want to talk about the
sense of safety that has been completely
eroded um namely in children because
children form part of half of gaza's
population um and and and this sense of
safety is eroded because of course it's
already eroded from you know six
previous military escalations living
under a brutal isra you know illegal
Siege uh collectively punishing you know
uh an entire population for over 16
years uh but it's even more eroded
because now uh they have been displaced
once twice we know of colleagues who
have been displaced up to six times um
in the last eight weeks and and uh I
have my own uh in-laws that are in Gaza
and right now the worry is not just
spending hours to find water spending
hours to find food um trying to you know
adapt to this new way of life with no
electricity and no washing machines and
no ovens and no gas stoves and no you
know uh uh Gaza is you know is not is
not was not the Middle Ages uh before
the 7th of October it was yes very poor
and people definitely depended on aid
but people were not uh you know uh
making bread in in over wood fires and
heating water over wood fires so you
know on top of adapting to this new way
of life people are having to worry about
when is my turn to leave again and and
and even my nephews are talking about
Mom can you make us a backpack with our
stuff on our own um because we never
know what happen something might happen
to you and I don't want you to have my
things with you you know and and he's
seven years old so that is the the the
the maturity that we're forcing children
into uh in Gaza uh and with these uh
multiple evacuation orders with nowhere
safe to go and with a completely
collapsed um uh wash system uh no
electricity and no calm lines I think
the the mental health aspect Beyond
being hungry and thirsty is also
something that now is beginning to show
um with people just really losing hope
and Bush people are being told by the
Israeli military to move further and
further south this is 1.8 million people
in the South already so many of them
displaced from the north they've moved
two three four times already moving
further south towards Rafa towards the
crossing towards the border with Egypt
what exists in that area for them what
infrastructure what shelter what food
what water well we're talking about 60%
of the entire Gaza Strip um uh being
bombarded what we've seen over the last
four days we're talking about carpet
bombing of entire neighborhoods we
already have reports back of wash
infrastructure being completely damaged
um uh uh shelters having been struck
over the weekend as well both in the
north and in the South um and and a
non-operational health sector I mean we
cannot say that the current hospitals
that are in the South that are partially
operating our operating Health System
it's not um uh squeezing people into a
place that's uh B basically as big as
London Heathrow Airport we're talking
about 1.8 million people in an airport
just so that I can kind of paint the
picture to people who don't really
understand how small Gaza is um it's
already overp populated it's actually
inhumane and actually uh not only makes
it impossible to deliver Aid to 1.8
million people in one place uh it's much
actually easier when you have shelters
all around and different distribution
points because you relieve the pressure
of one um but you increase the the the
risk of disease that which we're already
saying where there's already reports of
colera uh gastroenteritis is uh spread
like wildfire in Gaza right now people
are have been sick for the last month my
family has been sick and are not getting
better because conditions are not
allowing for them to get better and
squeezing people into into that
basically it does not absolve Israel of
its um duties and obligation under
International actually in fact it is it
could amount to a serious violation or
serious grave breach of inter
humanitarian law forcing people uh into
a small uh uh place and also
historically just want to add one point
historically these kind of safer spaces
um or safe zones or you know
humanitarian areas as they've been
dubbed in the last couple weeks actually
have brought more harm onto civilian
population than actually meeting their
needs so okay it's it's extremely
concerning and and husin as you see
people being pushed closer and closer to
R to this southern part of Gaza which
borders Egypt what is the conversation
in Cairo as you see this movement of
people well of course here in Egypt
there is near certainty than one of the
uh objectives of the Israeli military
campaign or or aggression against Gaza
is to push the Palestinians to towards
Sinai m and on the other hand the same
is taking place in the West Bank in
light of the uh harassment by the
settlers against the Palestinians
everywhere in the West Bank uh to the
extent that they have been uh issuing PL
pamphlets warning the Palestinians that
second nagba is on the way so here in
Egypt here in Egypt uh the majority
believe that this is the next move on
the part of the Israelis the long-term
objective of this war against is the
Palestinians in Gaza and in the West
Bank is to push the
Palestinians uh towards Sinai from Gaza
and would the Egyptian government would
Abdul Fat Al CI ever accept
that no uh of course uh for the last
eight weeks
Egypt uh has has has has been in talks
with the American
Administration and uh warning against uh
the forced displacement of the
Palestinians and the American
Administration has adopted and has
supported the Egyptian position and and
and we keep the Egyptian government uh
keep saying keep repeating its warning
that it won't accept the force displ
displacement of the Palestinian
towards
Sinai Elijah let me just bring you in
there because it does seem that we are
getting warnings from all sides for
Israel not to act in certain ways but
Israel doesn't seem to be paying any
attention what leverage can be brought
to Israel either from Egypt or the us or
any of the other countries that are
currently giving it a green
light this is a very excellent questions
actually all the Arab countries
are doing virtually nothing to support
the Palestinians apart from talking and
rejecting what's happening and Israel
understands that there is no weight from
the Arab countries who have a lot of
strength force and leverage cost to play
against Israel and against the Americans
to force a ceasefire to open a border
all the Arab countries were not able to
bring through Egypt the RAF Crossing one
single truck without the approval of the
Israelis who are counting trucks and
Counting how many trucks what in the
trucks and where these trucks can go and
to whom so we have seen the position of
the Arab countries extremely weak to the
point that there is no cut of total
relationship with Israel we only have
seen recall of ambassadors that the
Israelis understand that at the end of
the war all these ambassadors will
return to their functions we have
actually seen an extremely shy reaction
let's let Hussein uh have a chance to
respond to that what's your response to
Elijah's comments that Arab countries
are doing nothing and in particular why
can't Egypt open and control the Raffa
Crossing
itself well we we do do exercise on the
Rafa Crossing
uh unimpeded uh it's it's a we we are
applying our sovereignty on the RAF
crossing the Egyptian side of the RAF
Crossing because the RAF Crossing has
two sides the Palestinian and the
Egyptian one so why why are the Israelis
so much in charge there
then well uh the the the
Israelis
do shs in order to prevent of course
this is an excuse to prevent the
smuggling of weapons inside Gaza but did
you agree with those checks at this
point in time given how much they slow
up the amount of Aid that is reaching
Gaza as we've heard from Bushra people
desperately need more Aid to get in but
it is these Israeli checks that are
stopping
that that's that's right that's right
Madam and and that's why we in our uh
diplomatic conversation with the
American Administration we keep
insisting we keep insisting on the
absolute need to increase humanitarian
assistance to to Gaza to to Gaza and in
fact the Americans uh the Americans have
positively uh responded to our request
and they have promised before the of
course the uh resumption of hostilities
in Gaza uh they
or they talked about not not less than
100 trucks would uh enter uh the Rafa
Crossing on a daily basis so our diplom
our diplomatic contacts with the
American Administration uh is continuing
and of course as we as we have witnessed
in the last few days the American
position Visa the overall situation in
the Gaza Strip is evolving and we have
noticed that it's it's evolving I'll buy
it very slowly it's evolving if I may
use this term in the direction that we
would like to steer it let's just bring
Bushra back into this conversation to
again bring this discussion to events on
the ground as you can hear from Hussein
and the reality is that the tone towards
the war towards Israel is evolving but
it's evolving
slowly it it can't evolve slowly there
is no time for an evolution and there's
no time for Promises of trucks what
needs to happen
now I mean the who said that we are at
the brink of an epidemic that might kill
more people than bombs have um so you
know and it's not just about the trucks
and the trucks you know is a a small
need it's a need but it's about the
crossings in Israel being open it's
about restoring water it's about
restoring electricity from Israel into
the strip bringing in trucks of Aid and
some flour and some water and some
blankets is not enough and does not meet
the current needs um in Gaza we're
talking about I I I I said it 60% of
Gaza being um uh FL into Rubble we're
talking about almost 10,000 bodies under
the rubble who are you know what about
you know buring those um relatives and
family members and fathers and mothers
um roads are completely damaged even in
terms of delivering the aid through
truck um is is is a challenge inside
we're also having checks inside Gaza um
by uh armed troops so uh you know we're
in in there's a principle of unfettered
humanitarian access um in international
law uh all of these are fettered uh to
our access as humanitarians were not
even allowed in to carry out assessments
um to carry out uh repairs uh there's a
lot of materials that are not allowed in
uh very simple materials like the sheets
of a wash latrine that we're trying to
get in that's not that's been restricted
so it every every obstacle and it's much
too slow it's not enough um and really
it's it's it's like I said eroding the
sense of hope and and safety in Gins and
the long-term impact of that uh is also
something that we should be
considering um you know let's bring back
Elijah at this point because I want to
get back to what the US Secretary of
State Lloyd Austin said he said that the
that Israel risks strategic defeat if it
doesn't protect civilians more what does
strategic defeat look like to my mind it
is already a strategic defeat a bunch of
Palestinian resistance in Gaza managed
to stop the almighty Israeli occupation
forces at the Gate of Gaza in a very
tiny geographic area and at the end of
the day it's not bad that the Arabs are
not interfering because it seems that
the Palestinians can manage on their own
to challenge the Israeli Army this is
already something that the Americans are
fully aware of because they thinking in
a cool head they understand that the
Israelis in 50 days did not manage to
occupy and control because they need to
control it
20% of the uh residential area of
Northern Gaza that is a strategic defeat
that Israel has lost his image in the
whole world and it shows how when you
have determined people to stand against
the occupation forces no matter how
brutal they are Israel has managed in it
in its war against the children and the
women but not against the men of the
Palestinian resistance okay Ambassador
har haridi do you believe that Israel
has already suffered a strategic defeat
or is there time for a
turnaround well I guess after almost
almost eight weeks of uh constant
bombardment
uh with the exception of the 7day PS
that ended the last Friday they haven't
the Israeli AR Army has failed to
achieve the
objectives that Israel announced or the
Israeli Prime Minister had announced on
October 7th and he keeps repeating them
namely the destruction of Hamas the
release of the
hostages and to make sure that the Gaza
Strip would
who then pose a threat to Israeli
security nothing nothing of these
objectives uh has been realized so far
and so the Israelis are in a
dilemma and uh they cannot speak of of
achieving military Victory after eight
weeks of uh nonstop bombardment and the
their tanks entering some major cities
in in the Gaza Strip so of course the
Palestinian resistance the Palestinian
resistance is is is showing
determination and Sh we have to leave
our discussion today uh uh Hussein hii
apologies for interrupting your final
answer there but we definitely
understood your point uh many thanks to
all of our guests Bushra khidi Elijah
magnair and Hussein haridi and thank you
too for watching you can see the program
again anytime by visiting our website
that's ala.com for further discussion do
go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is at AJ insid story from me
Laura Kyle and the whole team here it's
bye for
[Music]
now